Before the wadi and watershed programs were implemented, the major crops that the farmers used to grow were maize, paddy, and tuvar. A few of them also grew adad, juvar, soyabean, wheat, chana and rarely vegetables. Out of the 63 farmers surveyed around the Limkheda region, all of them used to grow maize before the projects were begun. Another major crop before the projects was the paddy which the farmers used to grow during monsoon. About 33 out of 63 (52%) of the farmers used to grow paddy, and the major factor in their decision to grow paddy was the amount of rain that they expected during that season. Tuvar is another one out of the major crops which was grown by about 26 of the 63 farmers (41%).  3 out of 63 used to grow adad, 5 out of 63 grew chana, 3 out of 63 grew wheat during winters and 1-2 of 63 grew vegetables, groundnut, soyabean and bajri.  This clearly shows that the region’s agriculture was dominated by maize, paddy and tuvar majorly and it still is. 

Now things have changed in a way that farmers are able to grow new crops along with these maize, paddy and tuvar during different seasons due to better water availability, credit to watershed project, and also they are able to grow vegetables and fruits, credit to the wadi program, alongside the crops in the field. This is reflected in the following data : Almost all of the 63 interviewed farmers continue to grow maize and paddy. Also, more than 28 of 63(45%) farmers grow tuvar now. The change that has come with these crops is that the production has increased due to the facts that the water moisture level has increased in the soil because of the watershed, the water availability has improved and the farmers have started using better quality hybrid seeds. 

After the wadi program, the mangoes have also been planted and now about more than 22 of the 63 (35%) farmers have these mango trees around their farm, giving them extra income. Similarly, the farmers have also started growing different vegetables’ trees around their farms, which include guavas, lemons, lady-fingers, onions, bottle-gourds, bitter-gourds and tomatoes. These have been majorly grown in the kitchen gardens or the trees have been grown around the farms. Moreover, few farmers (3-4 out of 63) also grow mirchi, sugarcane, lasun, eggplants, brinjal and jamuns. So, with wadi, the major change in the pattern that has come is that more cash crops or vegetables are being grown around the region and also the productivity of the main crops like maize, paddy and tuvar has improved as scientific techniques have been inculcated in farming. Another interesting and notable fact here is that one of the families (Chanchiben Patel) have also been cultivating a Ful-wadi (flowers) in their wadi, which shows that the wadi program can be much more diverse.

Now with watershed, the major change that has come, as told by the farmers, is that now they are able to grow the crops throughout the year in all seasons. As mentioned earlier, majority of the farmers have still been growing maize, paddy and tuvar during the rainy seasons. But now more than 20 out of 39 (51%) have been growing wheat consistently during the winters. Also, the vegetables production has increased during the winter season, as opposed to only being produced during the monsoons. This includes guvar, bhindi, jambu, eggplant also. Another indicator of the improvement in the water availability and soil moisture is that the farmers have started growing cotton in the region, which requires more water while cultivating. From just 1 out of 39 (2%), now more than 11(28%) farmers have started growing the cotton in the region after the watershed project.

Seeds has been an important factor with respect to the wadi project and the improvement in the production. Major source for these seeds has been what the farmers around this region call as ‘Agro’, which is basically the term used for the shops or stores nearby or located in the towns of Limkheda, Dhanpur and Dahod. About 20 out of the 24 (83%) farmers surveyed for wadi, buy their seeds for crops and vegetables from these local stores. Another important thing to notice here was that few of the farmers who have wadi, don’t have to buy their seeds from the stores, i.e. they have been developing the required seeds in their own farms.About 2 out of the 24 farmers make seeds on their own, while 3 others of the 24 buy some seeds and make them in their farms too (which in total accounts for about 21%). Many farmers were also of the opinion that the quality of the seeds have improved and hence increasing the production and also the quality of the crop.

Another major factor in this chain is how and where they market or use these produce. About 9 out of 24 (37.5%) farmers surveyed, sell their produce to the local traders at nearby towns or villages. 1-2 of them even mentioned that if the production is higher then they even have to go to the market yard to sell it. Around 13 of the 24 sells their produce by themselves in the village or from their homes or in nearby towns. 3 out of the 24(12.5%) don’t sell at all and use all the production for themselves. 1 of these 3 also told that they keep some of the produce for themselves and sell whatever remains to the local stores. These also shows that the food security has improved.   

Overall, there is a clear indication that the crop patterns has changed as farmers have been growing different crops and vegetables throughout the year and are also able to feed their families along with earnings through selling these crops. Wadi and watershed programs have to be given a major credit for this improvement.   





E-story
Not A Fairy Tale
Smeet Jani
Along the Sajoi-Dudhamali road, in Dudhamali village, we stopped at a small ordinary shop, the types of which were plenty on that road. Out came a very skinny looking 50 year old woman, greeted us with warmth and offered us some water. As such nothing looked extra-ordinary about this shop or about her. We talked for a few minutes and then she took us behind the shop to the fields. There was a very beautiful wadi of flowers adjoining a well. The colorfulness of the Fulwadi gave a different sense of calm to me. Besides the Fulwadi was another field for agriculture used where she cultivated different crops. The Fulwadi was not something very big flower field like with flowers swaying around like in the Mughal gardens in Delhi. But the story of grit and perseverance behind small Fulwadi smelled just as lovely as you are standing in the Mughal gardens.
The woman I am talking about here is Chanchiben Patel from Dudhamali village. She hails from another small village named Khirkhai in Dahod. Born to the father working in railways, she had 4 brothers and 3 sisters. None of the sisters are educated. She was married to her husband in Dudhamali village at a very early age of 20. Husband’s mother had passed away and her father-in-law used to do farming on their land. Moreover, for about 30 years she and her husband used to migrate to cities like Surat for some labour work(like digging borewells, etc.), for a few months. During those times, the income from agriculture could only sustain them for half the year. For the other half of the year they had to depend on the income earned through labour work. They have 2 daughters, one of whom is a 12th pass and has been married, while the younger one is still studying in college.
Another road-block she faced in her life was during the time when she was diagnosed with a tumor in her stomach. Due to this, she also wasn’t able to earn for the family. In addition, the expenses for this tumor’s operation went upto 1-1.5 lakhs, which is way too high for such a family from a small village. But, on the brighter side her health improved and she was better then. 
Things changed when UTTHAN came in their life. The NGO formed small ‘Sangathans’ or Self Help Groups in different villages for the development of women in that region. Chanchiben joined the ‘Sangathan’ in her region and started contributing 100 rupees per month in it. Under the WADI program, UTTHAN also provided her with bamboos and fences to surround their fields with it for protection. They also provided her with different seeds of various vegetables to grow around her farm. Chanchiben also went for 3 day training program to learn about different agricultural techniques for her to implement and also teach others if needed. During the first year after that she sowed the vegetables, but to her disappointment everything they had sown was ruined by the cyclone. She was also given 5 honeybee houses to produce honey, but after sometime the queen flew away and so it was another disappointment.

Despite these setbacks, strong willed Chanchiben didn’t lose hope. She again got up and learnt, from one of her relatives, about growing a wadi of flowers. She herself put in hard work to cultivate that Fulwadi. Today, that Fulwadi looks like in the picture shown here.

Now, she plants seedlings 3 times in a year for the flowers. The flowers keep growing from these throughout the year. She buys these seedlings for the flowers from the Ratlam market. Moreover, now she gets about 100 rupees per kilo by selling these flowers and if the quantity of these flowers is higher the prices go down. This way now she earns about 2000-2500 rupees per month apart from the income from the farm and shop. Now, she grows Maize, Tuvar, Paddy and Urad in monsoon season, while in winters she grows wheat and chickpeas. Alongside these crops, she also grows Guvar, Bhindi, Mangos, Guavas and Lemons. She also told that about ½ bigha of their land is irrigated and about 1 bigha of their land is non-irrigated. Another thing to note here is that her father-in-law’s land is divided between her husband and his brother for farming. So the three of them, i.e herself, her daughter and her husband, depend on their share of land for their needs. But it fulfills their needs for food for three of them and so they don’t buy from the market. If there are more than 4-5 people at their house, then they have to buy food from outside.   
Now, only if this were a Bollywood or South Indian movie script, she might have a palace by now or maybe she might have become an MLA or at least she might have become a successful entrepreneur in flower industry by now. Neither this is a Superhero movie script. This is real life common man hero story. There are still the same old usual struggles which an ordinary farmer in that region faces. This is a story of how a totally uneducated woman fought through her struggles and achieved a normal life. She achieved all these just through her never say die attitude. After every setback, she came up with more will power to start again from zero and keep going forward. Such is the personality of this gritty woman, which can’t be bought from the market. If served with morning coffee, her story will get you motivated for toughest days at work. 
